# Tutorial of MP-MIM 

## An evaluation method for single-cell spatial data embedding in tissue architecture identification

MP-MIM is a novel embedding evaluation method that employs a graph convolution way for message passing and spatial autocorrelation index to evaluate embeddings from deep learning models used for spatial transcriptome analysis. It can accurately evaluate multiple embeddings with different hyperparameter settings and identify high-quality embeddings by producing a high correlation between the predicted spatial architecture and the ground truth.

## System Requirements:

MP-MIM was implemented on a computing server with 2.2 GHz, 144 cores CPU, and 503 GB RAM under an ubuntu 18.04 operating system.

### OS Requirements: 

MP-MIM can run on both Linux and Windows. The package has been tested on the Linux system.

### Install MP-MIM from Github:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/YuLin-code/MP-MIM.git
cd MP-MIM
```

### Python Dependencies: 

MP-MIM mainly depends on the Python (3.6+) scientific stack and python virutal environment with conda (<https://anaconda.org/>) is recommended.

```shell
conda create -n MP_MIM python=3.8
conda activate MP_MIM
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Configure RESEPT Environment:

Download and install [RESEPT](https://github.com/OSU-BMBL/RESEPT). Generate embedding and conduct tissue architecture identification. 

### Configure SpaGCN Environment:

Download and install [SpaGCN](https://github.com/jianhuupenn/SpaGCN). Integrate MP-MIM into SpaGCN and conduct tissue architecture identification. 

## Demo:

### 1. Set Baseline

The deep learning model RESEPT was used as an embedding sampling method to generate embeddings. 56 three-dimensional embeddings with different hyperparameter settings were generated and saved in the source code folder for 16 samples. Run the following command to generate the ground truth ranking and we take '151507' as the example sample.

```bash
cd RESEPT
python Embedding_Ground_Truth_Quality_Rank.py --sampleName 151507
```

### 2. MP-MIM Rank

We take an example of an analysis when k_num is 90 and l_num is 15 in MP-MIM. Here we use hyperparameters to demo purposes:

- **MP-k-num** defines the number of nearest neighbors in the KNN graph.
- **MP-l-num** defines the number of iteration in message passing. 

If you want to reproduce results in the manuscript, please use default hyperparameters.

```bash
python MP_MIM_RESEPT.py --sampleName 151507 --MP-l-num 15 --MP-k-num 90
```

### 3. Spearman Correlation Analysis

MP-MIM can accurately identify the embeddings with different qualities by producing a high correlation between the output ranking and the ground truth. Run the following command line to calculate Spearman correlation.

```bash
python Spearman_Correlation.py --sampleName 151507 --MP-l-num 15 --MP-k-num 90
```

### 4. Integrate MP-MIM into SpaGCN

The native SpaGCN and the SpaGCN integrated MP-MIM versions are in the source code. Please put the original dataset that contains the spatial and metadata information of each sample into the path of running SpaGCN with supporting for tissue architecture identification. Run the following command line to obtain the ARI of each SpaGCN version. 

```bash
cd ../SpaGCN/Native_SpaGCN
python SpaGCN_Native.py --sampleName 151507
cd ../SpaGCN_MP_MIM
python SpaGCN_MP_MIM.py --sampleName 151507
```

### 5. Convert Embedding to RGB

RGB image is used to show the underlying pattern and feature in each embedding. Run the following command line to convert embedding to RGB image.

```bash
cd ../../Embedding_to_RGB_image
python transform_embedding_to_RGB.py --sampleName 151507
```

## Document Description:

In the respective file paths, we have the following files.

- ***_embedding_ground_truth_rank.csv**:    Quality representation of each embedding is shown in the ground truth ranking. Row as embedding, col as ranking. 

- ***_MP_MIM.csv**:    Final Moran's I with max filtering evaluation of each embedding. Row as embedding, col as ranking. 

- ***_embedding.csv**:    Native embedding generated by deep learning model. Row as spot, col as embedding. First row as the embedding names. First col as the spot names.

- ***_graph_embedding.csv**:    Transformed embedding generated by MP-MIM based on message passing. Row as spot, col as embedding. First row as the embedding names. First col as the spot names.

- ***_metaData.csv**:    Metadata information of each sample. Row as spot, col as the specific meta information (the spatial coodinates are in the columns of array_row and array_col). First row as the element names. First col as the spot names.

- ***_transformed_lowres.png**:    RGB image converted from the corresponding embedding.

## Extend MP-MIM to General Case:

When we obtain the embeddings that will be evaluated, the embeddings and their corresponding meta information which include spatial coordinates should be formatted as the native embedding and metadata information in document description. The hyperparameters are defined as follows. Run the following command line to obtain the comparison results of Moran's I, Geary's C and MP-MIM. 

- **MP-k-num** defines the number of nearest neighbors in the KNN graph.
- **MP-l-num** defines the number of iteration in message passing. 
- **MP-type** defines the type of neighborhood information aggregation.

The default hyperparameter settings are recommended to be used. 

```bash
cd General
python MP_MIM.py --MP-k-num 90 --MP-l-num 15 --MP-type Distance_based_GCN
```
